In data science, there are
many terms that are
used interchangeably,
so let's explore the
most common ones.
The term big data refers to
data sets that are so
massive, so quickly built,
and so varied that they defy
traditional analysis methods such
as you might perform with
a relational database.
The concurrent development
of enormous compute power in
distributed networks and
new tools and techniques
for data analysis means
that organizations
now have the power to analyze
these vast data sets.
A new knowledge and
insights are becoming
available to everyone.
Big data is often described
in terms of five V's;
velocity, volume, variety,
veracity, and value.
Data mining is the process of
automatically searching
and analyzing data,
discovering previously
unrevealed patterns.
It involves preprocessing
the data to
prepare it and transforming
it into an appropriate format.
Once this is done,
insights and patterns
are mined and
extracted using various
tools and techniques
ranging from simple data
visualization tools
to machine learning and
statistical models.
Machine learning is
a subset of AI that
uses computer algorithms
to analyze data
and make intelligent
decisions based on what it is
learned without being
explicitly programmed.
Machine learning algorithms
are trained with
large sets of data and
they learn from examples.
They do not follow
rules-based algorithms.
Machine learning is what
enables machines to
solve problems on
their own and make
accurate predictions
using the provided data.
Deep learning is a
specialized subset
of machine learning that
uses layered neural networks
to simulate human
decision-making.
Deep learning algorithms
can label and
categorize information
and identify patterns.
It is what enables AI systems to
continuously learn on
the job and improve
the quality and accuracy of
results by determining whether
decisions were correct.
Artificial neural networks, often
referred to simply
as neural networks,
take inspiration from
biological neural networks,
although they work quite
a bit differently.
A neural network in AI is
a collection of small
computing units called
neurons that take incoming data
and learn to make
decisions over time.
Neural networks are often
layer-deep and are the reason
deep learning
algorithms become more
efficient as the data
sets increase in volume,
as opposed to other machine
learning algorithms
that may plateau
as data increases.
Now that you have a
broad understanding of
the differences between
some key AI concepts,
there is one more differentiation
that is important to
understand that between
Artificial Intelligence
and Data Science.
Data Science is the process
and method for extracting
knowledge and insights from
large volumes of disparate data.
It's an interdisciplinary
field involving mathematics,
statistical analysis,
data visualization,
machine learning, and more.
It's what makes it
possible for us to
appropriate information,
see patterns,
find meaning from
large volumes of
data and use it to make
decisions that drive business.
Data Science can use many of
the AI techniques to
derive insight from data.
For example, it could use
machine learning algorithms and
even deep learning
models to extract
meaning and draw
inferences from data.
There is some interaction
between AI and Data Science,
but one is not a
subset of the other.
Rather, Data Science is a
broad term that encompasses
the entire data processing
methodology while AI includes
everything that allows
computers to learn how to
solve problems and make
intelligent decisions.
Both AI and Data Science can
involve the use of big data.
That is, significantly
large volumes of data.